Match modes (`DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` + `REPEATABLE ELEMENTS`) (#1303)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/patterns/match-modes.adoc

:description: Information about Cypher's different match modes, which determine whether relationships can appear more than once in a graph pattern match.
:table-caption!:
= Match modes

Match modes determine whether relationships can appear more than once in a graph pattern match (nodes can appear multiple times regardless of the match mode).

> Cypher contains two match modes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cypher supports two match modes:
```

* xref:patterns/match-modes.adoc#different-relationships[`DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`]: a relationship can only be traversed once in a given match for a graph pattern.
The same restriction does not hold for nodes, which may be re-traversed any number of times in a matched path.
This is Cypher’s default match mode, applicable to most use cases.
* xref:patterns/match-modes.adoc#repeatable-elements[`REPEATABLE ELEMENTS`]: no restrictions on how often nodes and relationships can be traversed in a match for a graph pattern.
This match mode is required in order for paths to be able to traverse a relationship more than once. label:new[Introduced in Neo4j 2025.06]

[[example-graph]]
== Example graph

> To explain match modes, this page will use the scenario of the link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Bridges_of_K%C3%B6nigsberg[Seven bridges of Königsberg], a problem studied by link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonhard_Euler[Leonhard Euler] in 1736 to determine if one could cross all seven bridges of Königsberg exactly once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To explain match modes, this page will use the scenario of the link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_Bridges_of_K%C3%B6nigsberg[Seven bridges of Königsberg], a problem studied by link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonhard_Euler[Leonhard Euler] in 1736 to determine if one could cross all seven bridges of Königsberg exactly once in a single walk.
```

[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (kneiphof:Location {name: "Kneiphof"}),
       (northBank:Location {name: "North Bank"}),
       (southBank:Location {name: "South Bank"}),
       (lomse:Location {name: "Lomse"}),

       (kneiphof)-[:BRIDGE {id: 1}]->(northBank),
       (kneiphof)-[:BRIDGE {id: 6}]->(southBank),
       (kneiphof)-[:BRIDGE {id: 7}]->(lomse),
       (northBank)-[:BRIDGE {id: 5}]->(kneiphof),
       (northBank)-[:BRIDGE {id: 2}]->(lomse),
       (southBank)-[:BRIDGE {id: 4}]->(kneiphof),
       (southBank)-[:BRIDGE {id: 3}]->(lomse)
----

[[different-relationships]]
== DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS

The `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode ensures that a relationship can only occur once for a given xref:clauses/match.adoc[`MATCH`] result, regardless of the direction it is traversed in.
The same restriction does not apply to nodes, which may be re-traversed any number of times in a match.
As such, `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` is ideal to showcase the Königsberg bridges problem: in the graph model, not traversing a relationship means not traversing a bridge, the problem’s key constraint.

> `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` is the default match mode Cypher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` is the default match mode of Cypher.
```

> That is, if no match mode is selected, Cypher will default to solve graph patterns according to the restrictions imposed by `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is, if no match mode is specified, Cypher will default to solving graph patterns according to the restrictions imposed by `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`.
```

[NOTE]
The `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` keyword was released in Neo4j 2025.06 and can be used to explicitly specify Cypher's default match mode after `MATCH`.
For example, `MATCH DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS p = (start)--{,2}(end)`.
This is functionally equivalent to not specifying a match mode.

To show the behavior of `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`, consider the following query, which uses a xref:patterns/variable-length-patterns.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationship] to search for paths exactly `5` hops away from the start `Location` node, `Kneiphof`.

> The relationships used in this query are directional, meaning paths are traversed following specific directions for each bridge (`-\->`). 

Reviewer: It may confuse to use an abbreviated relationship pattern here and a full relationship pattern in the query.

.Find paths with a length of 5 relationships from a start node
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = (:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})-[:BRIDGE]->{5}()
RETURN [n IN nodes(p) | n.name] AS locations, 
       [r IN relationships(p) | r.id] AS crossedBridges // <1>
----

> <1>  xref:expressions/list-expressions.adoc#list-comprehension[list comprehensions] iterating over nodes and relationships in a path and returning specific properties (the `name` property from nodes, and `id` from relationships).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <1>  xref:expressions/list-expressions.adoc#list-comprehension[list comprehensions] iterate over nodes and relationships in a path and return specific properties (the `name` property from nodes, and the `id` property from relationships).
```

I think this matches the style of the `collect()` footnote.

> As the results show, a node may be traversed several times in the same path, but a relationship (bridge) is never re-traversed.

Reviewer: Is it worth giving an example of a path that is not taken e.g. `[7, 2, 5, 7, 2]`?

----
MATCH p = (:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})-[:BRIDGE]-{6}()
WITH count(p) AS pathCount, collect(p)[0] AS samplePath // <1>
ORDER BY pathCount
RETURN pathCount, 
       [n IN nodes(samplePath) | n.name] AS samplePathLocations,
       [r IN relationships(samplePath) | r.id] AS samplePathBridges
----

<1> The xref:functions/list.adoc#functions-collect[`collect()`] function collects all paths and `[0]` takes the first entry as the `samplePath`.

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| pathCount | samplePathLocations | samplePathBridges

| 48
| ["Kneiphof", "North Bank", "Kneiphof", "South Bank", "Kneiphof", "Lomse", "North Bank"]
| [1, 5, 6, 4, 7, 2]

3+d|Rows: 1
|===

image::different-relationships-graph.svg[Graph showing all but one of the seven bridges of Königsberg traversed, width=500, role=popup]
_In the `samplePath` with a length of `6` returned by `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`, all bridges are traversed except for bridge `3`._

However, if the relationship count is increased to `7`, `0` paths are returned.

.Find paths with a length of 7 relationships from a start node
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = (:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})--{7}()

> RETURN count(p) AS pathCount

Reviewer: Requiring that the Eulerian path must begin at a particular node is an additional constraint to visiting every relationship exactly once.

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| pathCount

| 0

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

In the `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode, each step must use a unique bridge.
After the first step, one bridge is used, leaving 6 remaining bridges to be used in the subsequent steps.

> Once all 6 remaining bridges are traversed, a 7th step would require re-traversing a bridge, which is not allowed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode, each step must use a unique bridge.
After the first step, one bridge is used, leaving 6 remaining bridges to be used in the subsequent steps.
Once 6 bridges are traversed, a 7th step would require re-traversing a bridge, which is not allowed. 
```

The original text is out-by-one.

This reflects the conclusion of Euler’s seven bridges of Königsberg problem: the impossibility of crossing each bridge exactly once.
The below query demonstrates this impossibility.
More specifically, it tries to find a path where each bridge is crossed exactly once with a length of `7` relationships, starting and ending at the same `Location`, `Kneiphof`.

.Find a path traversing all 7 bridges once before returning to the starting `Location`
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = (start:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})-[:BRIDGE]-{7}(start)
WHERE all(bridge IN range(1,7) WHERE bridge IN [r IN relationships(p) | r.id]) //<1>
WITH p ORDER BY length(p) LIMIT 1
RETURN [n IN nodes(p) | n.name] AS visitedLocations,
       [r IN relationships(p) | r.id] AS crossedBridges

> ----

Reviewer: I don't think this shows anything that the previous query hasn't already demonstrated. Also, the problem of finding Eulerian circuits (start and end at same node) is not identical to the problem of finding Eulerian paths.

Author: Have removed.

<1> The xref:functions/predicate.adoc#functions-all[`all()`] function ensures that each bridge must be traversed once in the path.

.Result
[source]
----
(no results)
----

No results are returned because, when using the `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode, it is impossible to traverse all 7 relationships once without any re-traversals, which is not allowed.

For more information about this match mode, see xref:patterns/reference.adoc#match-modes-rules-different-relationships[Syntax & semantics -> `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`].

[role=label--new-2025.06]
[[repeatable-elements]]
== REPEATABLE ELEMENTS

The `REPEATABLE ELEMENTS` match mode ensures that there are no restrictions on how many times a node or relationship can occur for a given `MATCH` result.
In so doing, the `REPEATABLE ELEMENTS` match mode does not solve the impossibility of crossing every bridge in Königsberg exactly once.
However, the ability to re-traverse relationships does allow Cypher to return paths when testing Euler’s hypothesis.

[NOTE]
Queries utilizing this match mode must specify the `REPEATABLE ELEMENTS` keyword after `MATCH`.

> The following example re-runs the above query, matching paths where each Königsberg bridge is crossed before returning the starting location

Reviewer: There are shorter paths that don't end at the same node.

.Find a path traversing all 7 bridges at least once before returning to the starting `Location` using `REPEATABLE ELEMENTS`
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH REPEATABLE ELEMENTS p = (start:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})-[:BRIDGE]-{,9}(start) // <1>
WHERE all(bridge IN range(1,7) WHERE bridge IN [r IN relationships(p) | r.id]) 
WITH p ORDER BY length(p) LIMIT 1
RETURN [n IN nodes(p) | n.name] AS visitedLocations,
     [r IN relationships(p) | r.id] AS crossedBridges
----

<1> Paths with a length of less than 9 relationships return no results because they do not allow enough moves to traverse all seven bridges at least once while forming a cycle back to Kneiphof.

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| visitedLocations | crossedBridges

| ["Kneiphof", "South Bank", "Kneiphof", "South Bank", "Lomse", "Kneiphof", "North Bank", "Lomse", "North Bank", "Kneiphof"]
| [4, 6, 4, 3, 7, 5, 2, 2, 1]

2+d|Rows: 1
|===

The query now returns solutions, and the order of the bridges traversed in the path returned demonstrates that bridges `2` and `4` were crossed twice in order to return to `Kneiphof`. 

> image::repeatable-elements-graph.svg[Several graphs showing order of traversals when using repeatable elements match mode, width=600, role=popup]

Reviewer: The arrows are very thin and the bridge numbers hard to read

Author: Updated

For example, `MATCH DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS p = (start)--{,2}(end)`.
This is functionally equivalent to not specifying a match mode.

To show the behavior of `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`, consider the following query, which uses a xref:patterns/variable-length-patterns.adoc#quantified-relationships[quantified relationship] to search for paths exactly `5` hops away from the start `Location` node, `Kneiphof`.
The relationships used in this query are directional, meaning paths are traversed following specific directions for each bridge (`-[:BRIDGE]\->`). 

.Find paths with a length of 5 relationships from a start node
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = (:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})-[:BRIDGE]->{5}()
RETURN [n IN nodes(p) | n.name] AS locations, 
       [r IN relationships(p) | r.id] AS crossedBridges // <1>
----

<1> The xref:expressions/list-expressions.adoc#list-comprehension[list comprehensions] iterate over nodes and relationships in a path and return specific properties (the `name` property from nodes, and the `id` property from relationships).

> As the results show, a node may be traversed several times in the same path, but a relationship (bridge) is never re-traversed (for example, the path `[7, 2, 5, 7, 2]`, which traverses the same bridge more than once, cannot be matched using the `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the results show, a node may be traversed several times in the same path, but a relationship (bridge) is never re-traversed (for example, the path `[6, 4, 1, 5, 6]`, which traverses the same bridge more than once, cannot be matched using the `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode).
```
Sorry, previous suggestion doesn't make sense with directed relationships.

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| locations | crossedBridges 

| ["Kneiphof", "North Bank", "Kneiphof", "South Bank", "Kneiphof", "Lomse"]
| [1, 5, 6, 4, 7]

| ["Kneiphof", "South Bank", "Kneiphof", "North Bank", "Kneiphof", "Lomse"] 
| [6, 4, 1, 5, 7]

2+d|Rows: 2
|===

In the next example, the direction is removed from the pattern, and the path length is increased to `6`.

> It shows that there are `48` valid paths with this length, where no relationships (bridges) are re-traversed, and the query returns one of those paths as a `samplePath`, showing both the nodes and relationships traversed therein.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It shows that there are `48` valid paths with this length, where no relationships (bridges) are re-traversed. The query returns one of those paths as a `samplePath`, showing both the nodes and relationships traversed therein.
```

<1> The xref:functions/list.adoc#functions-collect[`collect()`] function collects all paths and `[0]` takes the first entry as the `samplePath`.

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| pathCount | samplePathLocations | samplePathBridges

| 48
| ["Kneiphof", "North Bank", "Kneiphof", "South Bank", "Kneiphof", "Lomse", "North Bank"]
| [1, 5, 6, 4, 7, 2]

3+d|Rows: 1
|===

image::different-relationships-graph.svg[Graph showing all but one of the seven bridges of Königsberg traversed, width=500, role=popup]
_In the `samplePath` with a length of `6` returned by `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS`, all bridges are traversed except for bridge `3`._

However, if the relationship count is increased to `7`, `0` paths are returned.

.Find paths with a length of 7 relationships
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH p = (:Location {name: 'Kneiphof'})--{7}()
RETURN count(p) AS pathCount
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| pathCount

| 0

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

In the `DIFFERENT RELATIONSHIPS` match mode, each step must use a unique bridge.
After the first step, one bridge is used, leaving six remaining bridges to be used in the subsequent steps.

> Once six remaining bridges are traversed, a seventh step would require re-traversing a bridge, which is not allowed. 

Reviewer: This is still incorrect. Crossing the six remaining bridges (after the first mentioned in the previous sentence) the seventh would have been crossed. Either say "once five more bridges are traversed" or "after the sixth" or something equivalent.

Reviewer: It's the "remaining" in "Once six remaining bridges are traversed ..." that I think is incorrect.

Reviewer: Ah you fixed it. Great.
